Trend following trading is a trading strategy that tends to be overlooked or thought as impossible. One of the basic trend following strategies is "time series momentum — going long markets with recent positive returns and shorting those with recent negative returns" (Hurst, Ooi, and Pedersen 2014). Trend following utilizes technical analysis to determine when to enter and exit a market. Some of the most commone technical indicators that are used are moving averages, volatility, and bands. Trend following can be a good diversifaction to a portfolio or a complete trading strategy with high risk tolerance. Long-term trend following has been the primary usage of trend following traders. Short-term trend following has grown but has not been extensively research and tried. Long-term trend trading can return above market returns over a significant amount of time. The stigma around technical trading can be helpful and deserved for the average trader. But with a consistent trend follwing strategy the returns can be above market return. 
Fundamental analysis is very prevalent in the market today with investors like Warren Buffet touting his version of fundamental analysis. Trend following is the opposite of what investors like Buffet push. Both fundamental and trend following strategies rely on the market not being efficient. Fundamental strategies rely on stocks being underpriced compared to their financial statements and projected earnings, trend following relies on humans following trends with their money. These strategies rely on a inefficient market and prove different ways that the markets are inefficient. The utilization of both of these strategies could create a extremely diversified portfolio with above market returns.  
Determining that the market is inefficient is important because fundamanetal and trend following strategies would be unable to achieve above market returns in an efficient market. If the market was efficient "price changes would be totally unpredictable in the sense that no systematic excess return based on public information can be achievable" (Lempérière, Deremble, Seager, Potters, and Bouchaud 2014). Spending the many man hours of research and analysis of fundamental investing should lead to average returns and theoretically prove that the market is effecient. This is not the case and doing the research can lead to undervalued stocks being identified. Proving that the market is ineffecient using fundamental analysis opens the door for trend following to be a viable strategy. Trend following is a simple trading strategy that seems to good to be true but has proven to be a reliable strategy. Different traders and firms will each have their unique indicators and measurements for trend following. This makes judging trend following strategies as a whole difficult, but many different strategies have proven to work. It only takes one to prove that the market is inefficient, which opens up the possibility of creating trading strategies like trend following. 
This project will look at the potential of using a trend following strategy on a portion of your portfolio to diversify and increase potential earnings. As well as comparing long-term trend following strategies compared to short-term trend following strategies. Figuring out the differences between long-term compared to short-term trend trading can help the investor decide how they want to implement trend following into their portfolio. 
Trend following has been a trading strategy for a long time and their are many different firms that utilize different versions of their own trading strategies. Chesapeake Capital Corporation has had an average return rate of 11.18% after fees since 1988. The market has returned an average of 10.64% over that same time period. Chesapeake Capital Corporation uses a trend following strategy that limits their downside for less volatility. Trend strategies are also critical because their correlation with market returns is non-existent. While the market was tanking in 2022, the management firm AQR's was having one of their best years, "Its Alternative Trend Strategy also had its best year ever, with a 48.9% net of fees" (Mackenzie 2023). The most important point of these firms are that they exist and that they have been around for a long time. Trend following is not just a trading strategy of the past but can be utilized in today's portfolios. 

Correlate chesapeake capital to market returns

The tickers that were used to create the base portfolio were AAPL, MS, MSFT, BRK-B, GPK, and TSLA. These tickers create a balanced portfolio between growth and value. This portfolio aslo has a beta around 1 which is ideal given the returns that this portfolio has returned over the past 7 years. Investors ussually invest in companies like banks and oil companies. Utilizing a trend folloiwng strategy could be a potential replacement of these investments. The goal would be to capture a larger return while keeping the negative correlation aspect of those companies. Berkshire Hathaway B posted a beta of 0.88 and Graphic Packing Holding Company has a beta of 0.826. Trend following has a tend to "tend to exhibit negative downside correlation to equity markets" (Graham Capital 2021). This gives the portfolio a favorable chance of having smaller drawdowns than the market.
The trend following strategy that I based my model off is similar to Richard Dennis's strategy he taught to the infamous turtle traders. This strategy involves using the 50 day high and the 20 day lows to enter and exit markets (Quantified Strategies 2023). The traders would enter a market when a 50 day high happened and would exit with potential to completely flip their postion at the next 20 day low. This is a very simple trading strategy but proved profitable for the turtle traders if they followed the rules. 

Put in chart of enter and exit position

To scale your position in this strategy you would double your position if another 50 day high happened in the market that you were trading. You also would double your short if another 20 day low happened so the positions would grow as the trend continued. They managed their risk by having a stop loss order at the price two times the normal daily volatility. Soybeans normal daily volatility is around 21 cents, so if you entered long into a soybean future then you would put a stop loss order in at 42 cents below your entery price. This goes the same for when you short a position, the stop loss order would go 42 cents above the entry price.  

Insert daily volatility calculation

The risk management part of the strategy is a personal choice but in Richard Dennis's strategy the total risk to the portfolio should be two percent per transaction. To know how many shares or contracts to buy, take the daily volatility times two and multiple that by the value per tick. This gets the total loss value that could happen to your portfolio. Then divide two percent of the portfolio value by the total loss value and that will get you how many contracts to buy while keeping the risk of the portfolio under two percent per transaction. 

Insert contract to buy visual 

In the scenerio where a second buy signal happens and you make double your long position, then the new stop loss order for both trades would be at the stop loss order for the second trade. As the trend continues, the stop loss order can move past your original order. This keeps your risk to a minimal but also allows for you to capture some of those profits. 

Enter visual of stop loss order and a second stop loss order

This type of a trading strategy is simple but has been proven to be effective over the long term. Their are a substantial amount of large drawdowns but the wins are even more substantial. Adding this into a portfolio would increase the transactions and tax burden on the portfolio but is a simple trading strategy that does not involve any fundamental research that gives the benefit of diversifaction and potentially big returns during down times in the overall market. 

Trend following can be used on stocks, the projected return metrics will be smaller because the percentage value of volatility in stocks is much smaller than in futures. Futures can dievate twenty percent of the amount needed to buy the future, where a stock normally will trade in a range of three percent per day. This leads to the overall portfolio being able to hold less positions as trading stocks requires a larger portion of the portfolio value to get to the two percent risk measurement. In a one-hundred thousand dollar portfolio, one futures contract in soybeans will put the portfolio under that two percent risk, while that same portfolio would be able to buy one hundred and forty seven Tesla shares. These Tesla shares will be a much larger portion of the portfolio leading to not being able to hold as many different positions as just investing in futures contracts. 

Trend following and a range bound trading strategy can be used in cohession. Trading a market with a range bound technic than switching to a trend following technic after a metric could be a potential strategy. Trend following is making the trades when the price is outside of its normal trading range. Range bound trading is using support and resistence levels to trade the market inside that range. The critical part of range bound trading is predicting the range that the market will trade in.
Their are many methods to determine

Fibinocci range bound visual

MA range bound visual

Trend line following

There are many different technical trading strategies that all would not be possible if the market was efficient. Most of the time these technical strategies will return below average but they can add insight to a market. This plays into the investors psychology and the technical trader recognizes patterns and aims to profit off of them. As long as the human brian does not change, the opportunites to technically change will be there. With an infinite possibility of trading strategies the prospect that a technical strategy could never work is false. Technical trading has worked and a simple trend following strategy is an effective way of implementing technical trading into a portfolio. 

Insert stocks position visual

Conclusion
Fundamental trading relies on the accurate comparison of projected earnings and value to the current price and trend following relies on the psychology of traders and the reliance on human decision making when it comes to following the herd. Fundamental trading carries the normal market risk of recessions and major world events, while trend following brings a risk of losing two percent each transaction or whatever you determine your risk tolerance is. Technical analysis scares away a lot of investors because technical traders present it as a miracle trading strategy. This presentation is inaccurate and the simplistic nature of a trend following strategy can turn people off, so they go an invent complicated indicators and strategies to try and get one up on the market. These investors are losing the thing that causes trend following to work. Over complicating technical trading might work in a more efficient market, but the market has substantial inefficiencies. Investors in the market will never have enough information to make an accurate prediction, so simply being in the game and waiting for the big trend seems to work the best. 
With the ease of placing trades and developing a trend following strategy that is historically profitable, trend following trading strategies should be considered in portfolios for diversity. Trend following is a very volatile way of investing but even Warren Buffett does not equate volatility with risk. Trend following runs on the fact that "In the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run, it is a weighing machine." (Jacobs 2022) That voting machine can run and far. These are the moments that make trend following profitable and an option for modern portfolios. 


Stock portfolio beta and construction
rules of the long term trend following strategy
rules of the short term range bound trading


Long-term trend following strategy and performance
short-term trend following strategy and performance
portfolio changes when trend following is integrated

Possible Citations
https://www.cse.ust.hk/~rossiter/independent_studies_projects/fibonacci_trading/fibonacci_trading.pdf

Citations
https://www.trendfollowing.com/whitepaper/Century_Evidence_Trend_Following.pdf
https://www.reuters.com/business/finance/investment-management-firm-aqr-books-best-year-several-strategies-2023-01-06/
https://www.grahamcapital.com/assets/InsightSeries/Trend-Following%20Primer_January%202021.pdf
https://www.quantifiedstrategies.com/turtle-trading/#Original_Turtle_trading_rules
https://www.trendfollowing.com/whitepaper/Two_Centuries_Trend_Following.pdf
https://finmasters.com/how-warren-buffett-thinks-about-risk/#gref






