My course project proposal is going to test the efficiency of the NBA betting market and how accurate the initial betting lines are, showing how bettors can take advantage of potential arbitrage scenarios between betting platforms. This will test market efficiency’s because the betting market is strongly determined by the bettors intuition and psychology alongside the predicted model of the betting platform. These platforms are all in the same market trading the same product, betting lines. These betting lines are determined individually by each platform and are often different. This course project will focus on how all of these different platforms can form one market and function to peak efficiency. The other aspect of my project is to create a model that predicts the outcome of games. To understand the NBA betting market is to understand the bettor’s psychology as well as creating a model to create the original betting line. I will attempt to create a model that utilizes the NBA's advanced statistics to find correlations to win percentage and ultimately to the opposing team. 

First the betting platforms like DraftKings and other websites have to produce their own estimate of what is going to happen. I will be testing the efficiency of their initial betting lines and seeing how accurate these lines are. This could give the opportunity for finding outliers and other statistical anomalies to better understand the betting market or to gain an edge on the next bettor. There are over 40 sportsbooks operating in America right now and they all are trading the same service. If you want to buy soybean futures, you go to the Chicago Board of Exchange and trade soybean futures. If you want to bet on the super bowl, there are over 40 different online sportsbooks that you can use (if you are in a state that allows sports betting and online betting). To keep the market efficient all of these sportsbooks have to offer similar odds otherwise the market would have lots of arbitrage opportunities. I will look at the betting line history of several of the major players and see how they correlate to each other to determine the efficiency of the market. Without looking at the data it seems improbable that all of these companies could have their individually made odds and bets and yet keep the market as an efficient market. 

The sportsbooks are not equal, but they use a lot of the same betting lines. They definitely do have differences throughout the days that the bets are open. There is a difference between sportsbooks in their odds and all these sportsbooks change through time differently. This creates opportunity through using different sportsbooks and betting at different times. This opens up a new category of finding the historical values throughout the betting cycle and seeing if there is a trend with specific teams or game types. This would give the bettor an opportunity to not only utilize the advantage of betting through different sportsbooks as well as capturing the betting line changes. The betting line changes can create amply opportunity to make money but is largely speculative. The tricky part about the speculation is that you have to take into fact bettor psychology more than your model because the bettors are the ones that are going to influence how the betting line changes.

Looking for trends on when to bet the underdog and when to be the favorite could lead to a correlation effect that could help influence when the most optimal time to bet is. This strategy would involve adding more risk to the betting strategy but also opens up a plethora number of options that would normally not be available. These options would be created due to the small margins that the sportsbooks normally use to create their betting lines. These small margins would lead to small margins on the arbitrage bettors’ side but they would be guaranteed returns and that is what this project is looking for. This strategy should be impossible as the betting market is very efficient even for having multiple marketplaces, but there are a lot of factors that can go into the modeling and betting timing. 

The bettor’s competition in the betting market is not the sportsbook itself but the other bettors. This is a misconception that people have about the gambling world and especially in the sports betting world. The sportsbook creates the line but then is adjusted due to the other bettors preferences. This brings in the bettors psychology as a factor in the overall accuracy of the final betting line. The initial line is what the sportsbook thinks is closest to reality, but then gets influenced by the bettors. This influence normally is not a large change but does normally cause some movement in the line. 

Understanding a bettor’s psychology is the thing that will turn bad bets into arbitrable opportunities. If you were to gain a good understanding of bettor trends, then there is potential to gain from the trends. These trends could come from bet placement timing, team confidence, missing information, player perception, or a host of other reasons. This public's perception of a team has to be valued because that will impact where bettors put their money. The teams playing also play a big role, to see the difference in betting line movement in small market games compared to big market games is a variable that could be taken into consideration. If not a lot of money is being placed on a game, then the likelihood that the line will change is smaller than a game that is getting millions of dollars put onto it. 

With all these different variables and aspects of NBA betting, modeling, and bettor psychology this project can be taken many different ways. The heart of it is to find correlations between NBA statistics and winning to create a successful model and create my own betting line, while finding trends of bettors and timing to increase the odds of winning the bet or finding more arbitrage opportunities.
